in the famous tale of the Emperor's New
Clothes you'll recall all the high
officials at court and all the leading
men of the land agreed to pretend that
the Emperor was sumptuously arrayed only
one little boy told the truth
today on uncommon knowledge david
Berlinski mathematician philosopher and
essayist in one brilliant elegant book
after another
dr. Berlinski has attacked global
warming darwin and other scientific
pretensions insisting that the Emperor
is naked uncommon knowledge now
welcome to uncommon knowledge I'm Peter
Robinson a mathematician philosopher and
essayist who has taught at institutions
including Stanford Rutgers in the
university to Patti David Berlinski is
the author of books including the
devil's delusion atheism and its
scientific pretensions the deniable
darwin and the forthcoming to be
published next year the best of times
which the author has give permit been
kind enough to give to me in galleys
David Berlinski welcome thank you very
much for having me again
scientific pretensions from The Devil's
delusion quote a great many men and
women have a dull hurt angry sense of
being oppressed by the sciences
oppressed by the sciences they're
frustrated by endless scientific
boasting they suspect that the
scientific community holds them in
contempt they are right to feel this way
close quote
David explain don't you kind of think
that's that one is obvious I mean when
you run into an any kind of group of
scientists I mean not the low-level
scientists the bottom feeders but
physicists or mathematicians they really
don't waste any time telling you how
much smarter they are than you I mean
that's true we all have that experience
and the global warming issue is one
issue the biological issue was another
issue but it's more than that it's kind
of this feeling that because they're so
smart and that's true they are small no
question about that they have accepted
as an obligation and as a pleasure the
prerogative of telling the rest of us
what to think not only about the
sciences but about everything and that
is oppressive well we'll come to the
20th century in a moment with the
gruesome aspects of the 20th century but
there were some splendid aspects of the
20th century including for example
electric light indoor plumbing decrease
in infant mortality and wouldn't the
scientific establishment say we science
we scientists
brought that to you you owe us some
deference science gets places it enables
lives to become better more comfortable
healthier more rewarding we really want
to say that an immense amount of
deference is due the community of
physicists for the invention of the
indoor toilet I don't know I'd see this
stretch to me I love the toilet as much
as the next man but it's a 19th century
invention not a 20th century invention
and it had very little to do with the
sciences it was a brilliant example of
technology applied successfully also
electricity like penicillin I've got you
on that one have scientific terrific
invention couldn't be better
agreed it's a great achievement there's
no question about it
but the issue is not this particular
triumph look I mean quantum field theory
is a great achievement to mathematics in
the 20th century profound achievement
the issue is the overall overall
omnipotence intellectual omnipotence
that is assumed by the scientific
community global warming now as far as I
know you haven't written at length about
the science of climate change but you
have written this and I'm quoting here
from a post you put up on Ricochet this
past summer quote global warming who
knows not me for sure but what I do know
is that climate science is and has been
in the hands of intellectual
mediocrities and pious charlatans close
quote for sure for sure not everyone my
buddy dick Winston at MIT who was a
tremendous skeptic about global warming
is not a pious charlatan
but anyone who read those emails from
East Anglia the leaked email the leak do
you know and after you stopped chortling
and really paid attention to what
they're saying their entire scientific
position is well we've got a very weak
theory it's supported by so much
gibberish in the computer record let's
just hide that from criticism and
suppress those people who don't agree
with us that is the public posture in
global or not has changed it has changed
there's a lot more subtlety in the issue
and even the people who are most alarmed
are willing to admit well you know 15
years it hasn't been much warming at all
in fact there's been no warming
maybe we should factor that into our
self congratulation that's a good thing
but the real issue is that global
warming is an imponderable global
warming maybe increasing too dramatic
and harmful extends but we don't know
that the science isn't clear enough more
from that Ricochet post of last august
quote what is so striking is the
tendency of the scientific community
both to an extravagant boastfulness
you've explained that and to a barely
concealed eagerness to help itself to an
ever larger portion of the national
wealth close quote you wish to assert
that some large component of the
motivation among scientists to alarm us
about global warming is their desire for
federal funding all of it not just some
large part all of it the amount of
federal money going into global warming
client read the climate research is just
staggering it dwarfs the paltry
contribution of the average Ellis oil
companies there's a huge a huge federal
investment in this project and it can't
be stopped it's ongoing if you want to
help yourself to some of the national
wealth a firm to the National Science
Foundation or the National Institute for
Energy or any of the federal agencies
that you've got a red-hot proof that
global warming is increasing and you can
go to the very best Parisian restaurants
the next day I guarantee it this isn't
just global waters across the board
since the 1950s the dominating
motivation of the science to help
themselves to evermore swag now I can
sympathize it's a human emotion but
let's not blind ourselves to the sheer
facts this is as the budget increases it
has increased from 1950 to 2000
a dominating emotion in the biological
sciences 90% of the time is is spent on
grant renewals so while we're talking I
want to get in a moment to Darwin where
you're at least is outrageous and
provocative not very modest very modest
very modest but on this question of
funding of the sciences that is an
artifact largely of the Cold War
yes federal funding began pouring into
universities during the Cold War because
it was believed that on defense issues
space all of this we were in a
competition for a very national life now
we hear over and over again that we
ought to build down the Defense
Department because the Cold War is over
we ought to bring troops home from
Europe indeed we have been bringing some
troops home from Europe because the Cold
War is over
no one says it's time to end the tight
relationship at this point deeply
symbiotic relationship between federal
funding and research universities does
david Berlinski say that sure I just
said it let's end it now but before we
end it there's a final but if I thought
we were all supposed to believe in basic
research that's one of the not me not me
what good does it do if some guy is is
maniacally determined to investigate the
structure of the subatomic universe good
Sunday let him go do that but why should
the taxpayers be billed for a 16 billion
dollar superconducting collider in Texas
it was it was rejected so instead the
money went to to Switzerland for the
Large Hadron Collider but this is a
question that's very rarely asked the
the virtue of fundamental research can
be defined intrinsically it's important
to some people but the virtue of
fundamental research in a Democratic
Society that's not a question that can
be reserved to the scientific community
that's got to be a democratic question
and it never is
because when the federal government
provides funding it has engaged in
coercion of course it has raised it has
taken money away from citizens therefore
the scientists bear in a democracy a
particular burden of just
defying the good they are doing that's
for sure the justification is inevitably
invariably ineluctably always the same
boy this stuff is interesting maybe to
some people the deniable darwin quote
darwin conceived of evolution in terms
of small variations among organisms
variations by which a process of
accretion allow one species to change
continuously into another life however
is absolutely nothing like this close
quote the right way to think about
Darwin's signal achievement to 1859
there it is in a tree but there's no
question about it it is to say it's in
the tradition of Newtonian mechanics
when the underlying structures of change
are all continuous they move seamlessly
you can't do Newtonian mechanics without
the assumption of continuity mm-hmm in
certain respects it was a natural
assumption of the Darwin to make it was
the next step if this works for the
orbits of the planets that continuous
motion around the Sun elliptical motion
around the Sun well something like that
might well work for the changes in
species that was a dramatic idea in 1859
but the extent to which beyal
biology reveals sharply discontinuous
processes and structures was not
properly appreciated in the 19th century
I mean speciation is still a
hypothetical event we have very few
dramatic examples of the transmutation
of species it may be possible but you
know it's also possible to transmute
base metals into gold it's just very
expensive it's not what happens
ordinarily hmm so for example again in
the deniable Darwin you write about the
Cambrian the so-called Cambrian
explosion the fossil record before the
Cambrian era I'll try not to get this
wrong to mean - to me the Paleolithic in
the camera that's all of them look we
got a fossil record that's very thin
before the Cambrian
600 million years ago and then the
cambrian comes along and suddenly there
are a lot of species in those rocks and
we don't see them gradually taking shape
the species appear fully formed and they
exist and then some of them become
extinct but we don't see them developing
we just see them as they are as long as
they exist correct not entirely no ok
close all right there is a very rich
body of evidence about life forms before
the Cambrian others are always mistaken
Karen strata the real puzzle and it is a
much deeper puzzle is that they seem to
be uncoordinated with what takes place
in the Cambrian we have one set of
organisms before the Cambrian explosion
we have an entirely other set of
organisms after the Cambrian explosions
and if you take a Cambrian structure and
you move it back you frog step it back
in time there comes a point where all
the palaeontologists can say is well
there must be ghost lineages in the past
but we haven't put our hands on them
a long time to be put in your hands in
the mock looking for those ghost
lineages a long time is passed yes and
this is something just I want to make
sure that the intuition is correct here
this is something that actually ought to
be accessible to nearly any layman
because we've all seen movies American
Werewolf in London in which a human
being changes into a werewolf and you
actually see frame by frame the nails
grow that you ought to see something
like that albeit at a pace that you're
really tempting me what you ought to see
some some sort of transformation from
one from one mode of existence to
another goddess right isn't that what's
missing juicy profound transformations
from infancy to adolescence to adulthood
to old age and death that is a
completely unacknowledged example of a
transfer transmutation we all take that
for granted right and that if that
demands a profound explanation in its
own right but the the transmutation
across species lines
has just been very difficult to see we
see small variations and species things
changing slightly for example the beak
of the Finch changes but it seems to
change cyclically gets bigger fatter
more narrow the thing has a snout it
doesn't have a snout goes back to the
way it was we don't see the the Finch
becoming an elephant for example all
right that's an extravagant analogy but
even in cases where we seem to see a
record in the bones and the stacked dead
of the palaeontological record we really
can't quite makes it take take for
example the whale transition about which
I've spoken a number of time yeah the
modern whale big fat blubbery things
moves in the ocean it seems to have
derived from the line dwelling animal
about the size of a very large rock no I
mean it changes all the time I used to
think it was about the size of a cow now
it's been demoted in size what we cannot
and we yet we have the intermediate
fossils we do know but we cannot figure
out is how did that happen in the
appropriate window of time about eight
to ten million years one thing we don't
have a measure to tell us how many
changes we should expect and for another
thing when we try to compute the changes
that would be required to take a 1954
Chevrolet and make of it a nautilus
class submarine we very quickly say you
know thousands and thousands of changes
well is the way a lot different we don't
know we don't know once again that
deniable Darwin time it again biologists
explain the survival of an organism by
reference to its fitness and the fitness
of an organism by reference to its
survival now I want to make sure I
understand what you're arguing there
because whereas what you just discussed
requires deep knowledge of the fossil
record which neither I nor most laymen
will ever attain what you're arguing
here I believe is something that anybody
who Ponder's it for a moment ought to be
able to see which is to say
that the fundamental statement of
Darwinian of the Darwinian concept
survival of the fittest is purely
tautological there is no objective
criterion by which we can see whether it
actually works or not
that is why has an organism survived
because it's the fittest how do you know
what's the fittest because it survived
so in and of itself the Darwinian
conception doesn't convey as much well
it's not falsifiable at a minimum is
that right yeah I mean it's not a very
esoteric point was made as soon as
Darwin published his work the objection
was raised at the fundamental idea
absent and identification of fitness and
qualitative or quantitative terms is
vacuous and everybody everybody says to
himself yeah yeah that's that's right
that's not telling us a whole lot it may
be an important statement in other ways
but it's not telling us a whole lot
because if we don't know what Fitness
really comes to a qualitative account of
those properties that will allow an
organism better to reproduce in the
future than to say survival is
attributable to fitness and fitness as
an evidence of survival doesn't tell us
a whole lot we didn't know before yeah
sure
those organisms that survive survive
don't have to take biology 101 to know
that we hear a lot about the scientific
consensus in support of global warming
but that is as nothing by comparison
with the scientific consensus committed
to a Darwinian understanding of the way
life emerged and developed on earth it's
absolutely it's absolute so here you sit
across from you say oh yeah well the
tautological aspect of it was noticed it
right away in Darwin's own time people
pointed that out we've known for decades
now that the fossil record is not what
you would expect there are some serious
short deception problems there are gaps
so why why is it that well I mean all
you have to do is look at the way every
time you write an article now that
the internet you're assailed the
comments are vicious you're a sale
design professor at and what what
there's a level of commitment which is
not rational is that right
explain it yeah I think that's true look
looked a lot of what I write them
there's a source of deep indubitable
enjoyment poking my finger in somebody's
eye I'm not going to deny that and the
biological is so self-satisfied so smug
so sure they have all the answers that
somebody who comes along and gives them
a poke in the eye of course they're
gonna respond with a form of indignation
that is almost rabid that that that goes
without saying but the much deeper
question I think is why has this story
that's really all that it is why has
this story
oh say from 1960 to the present yeah
there was a lot of skepticism about
Darwin after he published and throughout
the first part of the 20th century why
has this story becomes so governing to
so many people well one answer one
answer is that with the decline of
religious faith with the decline of any
belief in the possibility of religious
experience and that's a fact of our
contemporary life outside the Islamic
world say there's a great hunger for a
creation story and what better
creationist story could be afforded than
the one told both by the physicist Big
Bang who knows how that happened Darwin
spontaneous emergence and development of
life on Earth no external transcendental
spiritual creator required none welcome
that's a powerful motivation that's a
powerful motivation design in the
deniable Darwin you quote the famous
argument 18th century English theologian
William Paley who said quite simply if
you see a watch you know there was a
watchmaker that's what the argument
comes to and he used that metaphor there
it is a very good watchmaker in your
case
David Berlinski writes in the deniable
Darwin quote it is worth remarking that
it is simply a fact that this
old-fashioned argument is entirely
compelling
we never attribute the existence of a
complex artifact to chance
close quote do we well I mean you don't
you agree you see Bill Clinton I can
quote Bill Clinton in favor of your own
argument which is the Bill Clinton if
you see a turtle on a fence post you
know it didn't get there by itself same
argument there's a level of skepticism
that I think becomes self-defeating
if someone says looking at a watch sand
mixed with water action of the way we
all understand right away without the
need for argument without the need for
argument that's not plausible I think
any discussion of Darwin and viola G has
to begin with that acknowledgement that
we have very powerful intuitions which
have not in any way been overturned by
biological research that the plain facts
in front of us suggests the level of
complexity which we cannot yet define
agreed that we find very difficult to
attribute to the kind of processes that
we see explained in Darwinian theory
look even Richard Dawkins says the same
thing and every biologist following
Dawkins says the same thing living
creatures give the appearance of design
Francis Crick says oh yeah that's good
we've got a remember they're not really
desert well why do we have to remember
that maybe that's the truth and that's a
truth that possibility is not
acknowledged again in the deniable
Darwin you tell the story it's not a
story to give an account of the MIT
physicist Murray Eden who ran some
calculations he estimated that the
number of proteins from which life might
be constructed numbers 10 to the 50th
power a very big number and the possible
combinations of these proteins from
which life might have arisen is 22 the
two hundred and fiftieth power which is
a number so large as to be it's
meaningless
incomprehensible you write quote a
number larger by far than the second
seconds in the history of the world
since the Bing Big Bang and then you
write this quote in some sense evolution
knew where it was going what do you mean
by that out of this incomprehensible a
large possibility field so does there's
must be some mathematical way of
describing this somehow or other
evolution didn't have time to experiment
with all the chances that's for sure
right isn't it I mean if we're looking
at a space such astronomical size 20 250
power clearly we're not talking about
any kind of random search in that space
when I when I made this point in in
Paris at a mathematics seminar my friend
Vinay Tom the mathematician got up he
immediately became excited by the whole
thing is that yes we need a theory of
canalization and he wandered to the
blackboard inocent let's assume an
n-dimensional abstract vector space and
canalization on the vector space i lost
i I didn't understand what he was saying
but the idea immediately is obviously
dealing with this enormity the house
there has to be directed paths
throughout the space now to say that
evolution knew where it was going
assigns a degree of agency to evolution
that I think is probably inappropriate
for sophisticated people like us but all
right well that'll fall so let me quote
you one more time from the deniable
Darwin I want to move on to history but
one more on evolution you quote the
Bible you quote the Hebrew Scriptures
David God said let the waters swarm with
swarms of living creatures and let fowl
fly above the earth in the open
firmament of heaven close quote and then
you continue and who on the basis of
experience would be inclined to disagree
with the biblical account and active
intelligence is required to bring even a
thimble into being why should the
artifacts of life be different
out with it David are you saying that
there is an intelligent designer a being
a God does it seem to you that I was
saying that you here's what I do comes
close and then you step back exactly
I've got to protect both lungs it seems
to me the intuitions of mankind should
not be spurned or scorned carelessly for
sure there's something sometimes wrong
Aristotle was wrong about physics our
intuitions about moving objects are
wrong there's no question about it it's
not impetus that counts but acceleration
but when it comes to living systems we
are among the living systems and I think
our intuitions about what's going on are
far more profound and they are in the
case of mathematical physics
I think the universal reaction the
universal reaction the default position
of the human race is that some creative
act was necessary to bring the panorama
into existence and I share that default
position I have here David Onley the
galleys that you were kind enough to
send me the best of time so let's take a
moment the best of times will be
published what you have is part one is
part two in part three which
unaccountably remain to be written I see
but the best of times will be published
when the book is written yeah all right
but there's plenty to talk about in part
one you begin this book this meditation
on history and violence the best of
times with the great Whig historian
thomas babington macaulay who insisted
that history was making progress that it
was going somewhere and you quote
Macaulay to this effect quote we this is
Macaulay we rely on the natural tendency
of the human intellect to truth and on
the natural tendency of society to
improvement close quote why do you start
with that because
Macauley writing in 1830 1831 was
expressing a very reasonable assumption
about early 19th century society after
the French Revolution after the Congress
of Vienna in 1815 that at least then
England we had finally come to a
position where we could see all of the
Enlightenment promises not fulfilled but
gathering force that is perfectly
reasonable to say that in 1830 1831 he
extrapolated to the far future he talks
he started talking about natural
tendencies as if they were inexorable
tendencies and he gave a very very
eloquent defense of the idea that
finally in 1830 after thousands of years
of tumult and strife and violence we
have seen our way forward just as the
Enlightenment figures predict predicted
we would see our way forward to
ever-increasing progress this is a very
powerful idea now this idea did not
really survive in the 20th century after
1914 between 1914 and to my way of
thinking to the present time no one
could talk about the natural tendencies
of societies taught improvement or the
natural tendencies of the intellect poet
truth that would just be absurd
nonetheless what is interesting is the
idea has come back and the idea is
almost a default assumption of the
scientific intellectual community that's
what I find so interesting
well the idea so here's what you haven't
written parts two and three so they're
even better
I'm sure Macaulay is writing I'm testing
this something out here I'm saying I am
the thought is occurring to me as I
speak so I will miss state it will occur
misshapen and I will miss state it I'm
sure but Macaulay is writing it occurs
to me not just when we begin to
understand who a gaslight this is this
is when the toilet begins to change
sanitation in London and so forth but he
also feels
I think a kind of unity of moral and
material progress oh yes
and that is that is not available to us
is it after the first world war after
Nazism after the Holocaust after the
killing fields in Cambodia we're left
with material or scientific progress
alone nobody would argue that moral
progress that that our moral life is
getting anywhere isn't that right and
isn't that in some ways isn't that
doesn't that feed back into the
scientific pretension we're the only
part of this civilization that's making
progress that's going anywhere we
scientists I think that's absolutely
true I think that's absolutely true but
don't forget that the Whig
interpretation of history Macaulay's
view of history is a progression if you
if you take away the specifics of
Macaulay's view of English in the
development of English history English
kingship a lot of other things and you
just look at what I think is the
profound idea that enlightenment
philosophy has given to skeptical and
intelligent men and women the only set
of tools that could possibly use to come
to grips with the world that is
reasoning rationality of faith and
progress a doctrine of equality and a
variety of ancillary doctrines then
you'll find that macaulay very nicely
expresses a kind of opinion about the
world that is astonishingly common it's
certainly the default position in the
academic world in the United States
mm-hmm it is true that every university
in the country now is talking about
solving the world's problems one phrase
or enough one phrase like that or
another is in every fund rating raising
a letter you will receive well then you
write about the you write at some length
about the first world war which is the
the huge civilizational catastrophe
immolation malaysia civil
and throughout the 20th century you
write that but some 230 million victims
of violence slaughtered in the first
world war killed in the Holocaust
starved by Stalin and Mao the killing
fields in Cambodia and on and on and
then you quote Hannah Arendt it is in
the very nature of things human that
every act that has once made its
appearance and has been recorded in the
history of mankind stays with mankind as
a potentiality long after its actuality
has become a thing of the past
close quote that's arresting enough
here's what David Berlinski adds I'm
quoting you it is in this sense that the
20th century having introduced into
human history crimes never before
imagined is immortal it is simply there
an obelisk in human history
black forbidding irremovable and in
expungeable close quote I think that's
true God help us I think it's true when
I read that I thought to myself I
believe I understand how Germans of my
generation feel they can't get out from
under their own history and they never
will and what you're saying is none of
us can get out from under their history
or Soviet history because we share an
identity with humanity itself to lose
that would be to lose something enormous
importance we cannot allow ourselves to
forget what the 20th century really
represented and just as the crucifixion
in Christian theology is beyond space
and time so the crimes of the 20th
century are in a place of their own
they're not simply incidental acts of
violence they fundamentally changed the
way we should not the way we do with the
way
should think about human history to
seriously look at the 20th century the
First World War the Second World War 60
million deaths the Holocaust the
inconceivable project of exterminating
European jewelry the great terror
Mao's lunatic experiments for the
Chinese people to seriously look at all
that you cannot go back and read no
calling you just can't I mean you can
read him but you can't take them
seriously anymore and what I find so
dismaying is that while I have that
particular point of view to espouse
there plenty of people who are going
back to Macaulay
we're saying the same thing 20th century
well you know a lot of rotten things
happen but those are statistical
anomalies they happen from time to time
the first and second wall well one of
those things that just happens we should
expect a big war every 10,000 years we
just happened to live through it that to
my to my way of thinking is simply
insane you can't read Macaulay but you
argue again in the best of times that
you can read st. Agustin quote I'm
quoting you now an analysis of the First
World War adequate to its magnitude
would require a work comparable to st.
Agustin city of God Augustine's position
of course is that he's Bishop of Hippo
he's in North Africa as the barbaric
during the first sack of Rome he
witnesses the civilization of which he
himself represents one of the greatest
flowers deeply immersed deeply educated
in the classical works and he sees
across the Mediterranean a
civilizational collapse he's not in the
position we're in of guessing at how
much longer things will run he lives
through the sack of Rome he sees it
alright
Augustine could grasp events I'm
continuing to quote you David only by a
radical reinterpretation of human
history the categories to which he
appealed are no longer available to
historical analysis close quote
in what ways did Agustin reinterpret
history and why can't we
access his categories I think I think
the prey sees the summer you gave was
dead-on
exactly exactly right Agustin watched a
comparable catastrophe
I mean don't forget classical
civilization lasted a whole lot longer
than modern European civilization and it
was a magnificent achievement the
statecraft art politics science and the
bit should just crumble before his eyes
you know the dates are very interesting
360 370 380 classical civilization Roman
civilization is still functioning thirty
years later
Alaric invades and thirty years later
there's a catastrophe in Augusta played
around with the idea that perhaps
perhaps there was an explanation in
terms of the violence and stupidity of
the pagan past they actually
commissioned someone to to look into it
a very interesting book title of which I
forgot now you came to the collusion
this isn't this isn't right the only
explanation adequate commensurate to the
magnitude of events cannot be history
historical it has to be theological it
has to involve a limitation of our
association with this city of men and a
refocusing our attention on the City of
God and to see the interaction between
the two is part of a divine plan now you
cannot you cannot in the 21st century
argue that way anymore you simply come
it's no longer part for better or for
worse of our intellectual experience you
cannot argue that way comma and be taken
seriously in faculty lounges that's
running that what you mean yes didn't
Benedict the sixteenth argue just that
way I don't know what Pope Francis will
argue aren't their wise men as there
aren't there and learning rabbis in
Israel who consist on grounding isn't
yeah I think you're absolutely right but
the point is we do live in a society
where the house of intellect is
coordinated with only a finite number of
microphones and those microphones are
connected with the academic
world and with a certain part of the
journalistic world I think that's true
in the United States is true of Canada
England France throughout Europe there
is a doctrine amounting to a dogma and
according to the doctrine of the dogma
this way of thinking no matter what
Benedict says or what the rabbi's in
Israel say is not part of the interprete
Balcon
it cannot be introduced should it be
introduced would it make more sense have
we lost something of tremendous value in
our culture don't forget we are part of
a judeo-christian culture my answer is
yes of course of course we have lost
something of value we can't think we
cannot think in those terms any we
cannot attain the truth about the
catastrophe well I don't even want to
prejudge it we cannot attain to the
truth about the times in which we live
it's very difficult and it's becoming
progressively more difficult for a very
simple reason those in a position to
know the 20th century from the inside
where the horror really lay are dying
which means that for historians to look
at the 20th century they will have to
look at the 20th century the way we look
at the Napoleonic era now and the
natural human bonds of outraged sympathy
and horror will be sundered and this is
very alarming it means that the whole
part of the 20th century which could
have been the centerpiece for a
reinterpretation of human history is
destined to disappear without a trace
the real meaning now
you argue you come close to arguing for
design in science are you arguing for
some kind of overarching design in human
affairs
I believe there must be some sort of
overarching design in human affairs
otherwise history is a series of
disconnected rather meaningless events
but I see no evidence that history is
the series of disconnected obviously
meaningless events we can see it
whenever we do small historical research
look there's an odd
his connection between the catastrophe
of the First World War the Russian
Revolution a Russian civil war the
development and rise of Nazism in
Germany the Holocaust these things are
not random occurrences they have an
inner logic and if we're sensitive we
can discern the inner logic and
sometimes no great sensitivity is
required look it would be inconceivable
to think about killing all of Europe's
Jews
if European civilization had not so
successfully killed 9 million of its
brightest most able young men in the
First World War these are connected
coordinated events mmm David two final
questions yes let me read to you the
antiphon from mass this very day a
wisdom of our God Most High guiding
creation with power and love come to
teach us the path of knowledge God
guiding creation with power and love do
you buy that I hope it's true that's a
fair enough answer look the real answer
is I am as much part of the same
intellectual culture as everyone I'm
criticizing because I find it
impossibly difficult to get out of it
there is no double position being in it
and looking at it from the outside and
that's a difficult position I think
that's where we all are in the West the
Islamic world has different set of
procedures different concerns I
acknowledge that but as anyone who came
to maturity intellectual maturity in an
academic setting and is responsive to
academic standards of taste discretion
probity goodwill of course I find it
very difficult to evade the sense that
I'm in a straitjacket I'm suffocating in
the straitjacket but the minute I try to
remove the shackles I get anxious too
and I think we all feel exactly that way
exactly that way last question and in
the devil's delusion you write I'm just
going to quote you a kind of syllogism
with which you end that book
if the universe is contingent there is
no saying whether it existed forever
maybe maybe not if anything might not
exist then it is reasonable to ask why
it does exist well why does it exist no
I mean really how does David Berlinski
answer that question at this stage in
his life having written that book a
decade ago and having the best of times
in hand I don't think I hate to keep
giving you a vase advance residence I
mean I feel after an hour interview like
that's someone like a seal slithering
around the pier but I think the honest
answer is boy are you making a mistake
if you want the sciences to answer that
question the physicists are not going to
give you any help
David Berlinski author of The Devil's
delusion the deniable Darwin and as soon
as he finishes writing it to be
published next year we we feel certain
the best of times
David Berlinski thank you thank you for
having me on as a pleasure
good questions - thank you - all David
from you very high praise for the Wall
Street Journal in the Hoover Institution
I'm Peter Robinson
[Music]